---
title: "Placing the Stones"
date: 2019-03-31T10:07:35+02:00
draft: false
cookieSetting: "1"
returnTo: "lessons/02"
section: "index.html#rules"
---

# | Placing the Stones
## Hard to master, but easy to learn

> Go is a wonderful ancient game and still the most popular boardgame in the World. While it is infamously hard to master all the intricate strategies, learning the rules is easy and should not take more than a few minutes. Go can be enjoyed at any level of ability so these rules are all you need to fully enjoy a match.

Ordinarily, Go is played on a square grid of 19x19 or 9x9 lines with a set of black stones for one player and white stones for the other. The aim of the game is to get more points than your opponent. Players get points for surrounding territory and by capturing opponent's stones.

Feel free to test out a few moves (if you haven't already) for both Black and White. 

{{< jgoboard >}}

{{< rule >}}
The stones are played on the {{< black "intersections." >}} Not inside the "squares".
{{< /rule >}}

{{< rule >}}
{{< black "Black" >}} plays first.
{{< /rule >}}

{{< rule >}}
After that, Black and White take turns {{< black "alternately">}}.
{{< /rule >}}

{{< rule >}}
Once a stone is played it remains stationary, unless {{< black "captured">}}.
{{< /rule >}}

Already, you are almost ready to play Go! We will talk about capturing in the next chapter.
If you really want to know everything, check out the extra information below.


{{< extra "1" "Compensating the first move" >}}
	Is the game completely fair, when Black gets the first move? It sure isn't! To make up for this advantage, White gets several extra points from the start (called komi). 
    It is usually 6.5 points on the 19x19 board and only 5.5 on 9x9. The half point prevents ties.
{{< /extra >}}

{{< extra "2" "A polite first move" >}}
	It is traditional to play one's first move into the upper right corner of the board. This way a player symbolically bows to his opponent (White is traditionally the stronger player). This habit is still common even in online play.
{{< /extra >}}

{{< extra "3" "A brief history of Go" >}}
	Go is believed to be the oldest board game in the world still being played in its original form.<br><br>
	
	It most probably originated in China some 3,000 or 4,000 years ago. The game then spread to Japan (where it flourished and became a huge part of their culture), Korea, and much, much later to the rest of the World.<br><br>
	
	For the longest time Go was the last game in which human masters played better than even the most sophisticated programs (and not for the lack of trying). It wasn't until 2016 and the invention of neural networks that computers finally took over and started beating top human players.<br><br>
	
	Nowadays Go is gaining popularity in western countries and many professional orginazations are being established across Europe and the rest of the World.
{{< /extra >}}