---
title: "Endgame (yose)"
date: 2019-03-31T10:05:17+02:00
draft: false
cookieSetting: "14"
puzzles:
- id: pzl1
  target: 14-1
  text: Endgame
- id: pzl2
  target: 14-2
  text: Endgame tricks
returnTo: "index.html#strategies"
---

# | Is Endgame (Yose) Important?
## Yes, it is.

> For some reason, endgame is often sort of a overlooked part of a go Game. I am not sure why. People often think the game is decided before it comes to endgame, and sometimes it is, but if you have chosen an equal opponent, endgame should actually be the final showdown where everything is decided. 

**It is not even hard to understand. There are some tricks of course, but all in all it is usually just about diligence. And with a good endgame you can catch up like 10 points easily.**

Once all the big points are taken, board is divided between the two players, all big fights have ended and nothing big is likely to die, we enter endgame. To play a decent endgame just follow these rules:

{{< rule >}}
	Sente moves {{< black "first!" >}}
{{< /rule >}}
If there is unlikely to be any big ko fights be sure to take EVERY sente move you can. Even if it is only 1 point, if your opponent has to answer it it is one point for you and nothing for your opponent. Find 10 moves like this and you will have earned 10 points.

{{< rule >}}
	Do {{< black "not" >}} answer every attack blindly.
{{< /rule >}}
During endgame - to have sente means to be making points. Consider sacrificing even a few points (by not answering an attack) to gain sente. It is fine to lose 3 points of territory if you can make 5 points just by gaining sente. If you are only answering you are not gaining any points.

{{< rule >}}
	Once out of sente moves chose the {{< black "biggest" >}} gote play.
{{< /rule >}} 
Obviously. If you have to give up sente, better make it as profitable as possible.

And that's it. It is all very logical and easy, and yet I see games every day, where players fail completely to bring home a won game, just because of a complete lack of endgame understanding.

{{< tsumego >}}

See how big the difference can be even on 9x9 board? On 19x19 it would be even bigger.
 

